Problem background and understanding:

America has seen, in 2018, over 36,500 fatalities due to road/ Motor vehicle related incidents. (Source Wikipedia - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motor_vehicle_fatality_rate_in_U.S._by_year) This rate, though reducing, is still high and is over 11 fatalities per 100,000 people in the US. In Seattle there are over 13,000 crashes a year with an average of 20 deaths and 150 people serious injuries every year. While the trend might have dipped in 2018, it has gone back up in 2019. (Source - https://sdotblog.seattle.gov/2019/12/10/slower-speeds-save-lives-a-path-to-end-traffic-deaths-serious-injuries-in-seattle/)

With the availability of historic and detailed data, coupled with mordern computer capabilities in AI/ML - an attempt should be made to reduce avoidable fatalaties on the roads by predicting conditions that result in high probabilites of road incidents or deaths.

Models can be built and tuned to use the SDOT historic data combined with current/ real-time data like weather, traffic conditions, time of day/ month/ year etc to advise authorities where and when temperory speed limits need to be implemented or intersections need extra lights etc; or to advice commuters to avoid certain roads during certain conditions, or to advise pedestrians to navigate away from certain roads/ intersections.

The model so built should be accurate and consistent so that users gain trust in its capabilities and even a single life saved would be a sucess.

SDOT Data structre:

The data in provided in the course is from Seattle's DOT (SDOT) Traffic Management Division (Traffic records group) covering the periods from Jan'04 to May'20. It contains nearly 200,000 instances of incidence, measured across 38 different variables. 

The data is labled and largely has categorical attributes. This easily lends itself to a supervised, categorical Classification model like Decision Tree, Logistic Regression or SVM.  For this exercise, I intend to use the Logistic Regression model as it allows us to understand the impact an independent variable has on the dependent variable while controlling other independent variables. Additionally, we can determine the probility of accuracy of the model outputs.

The target variable for the dataset is the "SEVERITYCODE" attribute which is binary - either 1 or 2 - indicating fatality in the incident (2) or injury (1).

The feature variables selected for the model trainig are 'LOCATION','ROADCOND' (Road conditions),'LIGHTCOND' (Light conditions),'WEATHER','SPEEDING' (Speeding Yes/ No),'JUNCTIONTYPE','PERSONCOUNT' (Persons involved),'VEHCOUNT' (Vehicles involved).

There are a few outliers like one incident with 81 people invoived in a single incident as well as a single incident involving 12 vehicles.

